---
title: Install
---

# Install --- How to install milter manager

## About this document

This document describes how to install milter manager.

## Dependencies

This section describes softwares that are depended onmilter manager.

### Required

milter manager depends on the following softwares. Theyshould be installed before building milter manager.

* GLib &gt;= 2.12.3
* Ruby &gt;= 1.8.5 (Support 1.9.x since milter manager 1.8.4)
* Ruby/GLib2 (Ruby-GNOME2) &gt;= 0.16.0

### Optional: Testing

To run milter manager's unit tests, the following softwaresare needed. They are needed for running unit tests but notneeded for running milter manager.

* Cutter &gt;= 1.0.6
* LCOV

### Optional: Graph

milter manager provides a feature that generates graphs formilter's status and so on from milter manager log. Thefollowing softwares are required to generate graphs but theyare not required for running milter manager.

* RRDtool
* RRDtool's Ruby bindings

The following software is also needed to integrate with [Munin](http://munin-monitoring.org/):

* munin-node

## milter-manager

milter-manager is a core program of the milter manager package. milter-manager works as a milter and connects to MTA and child milters.

Here are documents about how to install milter-manager to your platform:

* [Debian](debian.html)
* [Ubuntu](ubuntu.html)
* [CentOS](centos.html)
* [FreeBSD](freebsd.html)
* [Etc](others.html)

## milter-manager-log-analyzer

graphs generated by milter-manager-log-analyzer

milter-manager-log-analyzer is a program that generatesgraphs from milter-manager's log. Installing milter-manager-log-analyzer is optional.

To confirm milter behavior, we can usemilter-manager-log-analyzer. It's convenient for confirming new milter's effect and milter result in chronological order visually.

milter-manager-log-analyzer analyzes milter-manager logs from syslog output. It uses [RRDtool](http://oss.oetiker.ch/rrdtool/) to generate graphs. milter-manager-log-analyzer analyzes the logsperiodically by cron.

Here are documents about how to installmilter-manager-log-analyzer.

* [Debian](debian-options.html)
* [Ubuntu](ubuntu-options.html)
* [CentOS](centos-options.html)
* [FreeBSD](freebsd-options.html)

